# Problem Sheet 1

??? abstract "Problem Hints"

    <div>
    <object data="../../assets/problem_sheets/1-sols.pdf" type="application/pdf" style="width: 100%; min-height: 100vh">
    <embed src="../../assets/05062025-lecture-slides.pdf.pdf" type="application/pdf"/>
    </object>
    </div>

## Question 1

__Find an explicit bijection $f: \mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N}$.__

!!! success "Solution (Diagonals of a 2D Grid)"

    From lectures we've seen we can define this bijection by considering diagonals of a 2D grid consisting of all pairs $(m, n) \in \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N}$. Each diagonal corresponds to a fixed value of $s = m + n$. For example diagonal $s = 2$ contains elements $(2, 0), (1, 1), (0, 2)$.

    Each diagonal $s$ contains $s + 1$ elements. The total number of pairs before diagonal $s$ is the triangular number:

    \[
        T_s = \sum_{i = 0}^{s - 1} (i + 1) = \frac{s(s + 1)}{2}.
    \]

??? tip "Alternative Solution (Cantor Pairing)"

    The Cantor pairing function gives an explicit bijection from $\mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N}$ to $\mathbb{N}$.

    \[
        \pi(m, n) = \frac{(m + n)(m + n + 1)}{2} + n.
    \]

## Question 2

__Prove carefully from the definition that if $|A| \leq |B|$ and $|B| \leq |C|$, then $|A| \leq |C|$.__ (This says that this relation is __transitive__ on any set of sets).

!!! success "Proof"

    Given that $|A| \leq |B|$ and $|B| \leq |C|$ this means there exists injective functions $f: A \to B$ and $g: B \to C$. Now consider the composition of these function $g \circ f: A \to C$.

    It now suffices to show that $g \circ f$ is injective. Let $x, y \in A$ and suppose that $(g \circ f)(x) = (g \circ f)(y)$. Now since $f$ is injective, this implies that $f(x) = f(y)$. Similarly, since $g$ is also injective we have that $g(f(x)) = g(f(y))$. Thus there exists an injective function from $A$ to $C$, hence $|A| \leq |C|$.

## Question 3

__Prove that if $A$ is a nonempty set, then $|A| \leq |B|$ if and only if there exists a surjective map $g: B \to A$__ (assuming the Axiom of Choice).

!!! success "Proof"

    $(\implies)$ Suppose there exists an injective function $f: A \to B$. Then each element of $A$ corresponds to a distinct element in $f(A) \subseteq B$. Consider a fixed element $a_0 \in A$ then define $g: B \to A$ by

    \[
        g(b) = \begin{cases}
            f^{-1}(b) & \text{if } b \in f(A), \\
            a_0 & \text{if } b \notin f(A).
        \end{cases}
    \]

    For every $a \in A$, there exists $b = f(a) \in f(A)$ such that $g(b) = f^{-1}(f(a)) = a$, so $g$ is surjective onto $A$.

    $(\impliedby)$ Suppose there exists a surjection $g: B \to A$. For each $a \in A$, since $g$ is surjective, there eixsts at least one $b_a \in B$ such that $g(b_a) = a$. Now define $f: A \to B$ by choosing such an element $b_a$ for each $a: f(a) = b_a$. This is injective because if $f(a_1) = f(a_2) = b$, then applying $g$ gives $a_1 = g(b) = a_2$. Hence, $f$ is an injection from $A$ into $B$.

## Question 4

__Let $A$ be any infinite set and $B$ any countable set. Prove that $|A| = |A \cup B|$.__

!!! success "Proof"

    We first prove $|A| \leq |A \cup B|$. Consider the identity map $f: A \to A \cup B, f(a) = a$. This is obviously injective hence $|A| \leq |A \cup B|$.

    We now prove $|A \cup B| \leq |A|$. Fix an enumeration of $B$, say $B = \{b_0, b_1, b_2, \dots\}$. Since $A$ is infinite, it has a countable infinite subset $A' = \{a_0, a_1, a_2, \dots\}$. Then we define $g : A \cup B \to A$ by

    \[
        g(a) = \begin{cases}
            a & \text{if } a \in A \setminus (A' \cup B), \\
            a_{2n} & \text{if } a = a_n \in A' \setminus B, \\
            a_{2n + 1} & \text{if } a = b_n \in B.
        \end{cases}
    \]

    which is clearly injective. Hence we have $|A \cup B| \leq |A|$.

    Thus by Schroeder-Bernstein's Theorem $|A| = |A \cup B|$.

??? tip "Alternative Proof"

    Let $A' \subset A$ where $A'$ is countably infinite. Let $B' = B \setminus A$. Then $B'$ is countable and $A \cup B = A \cup B'$ and $A \cap B' = \emptyset$.

    Now since $A'$ and $A' \cup B'$ are countably infinite, there is a bijection $f: A' \cup B' \to A'$. We can then extend $A \cup B' = A \cup B$ by letting $f(x) = x$ for $x \in A \setminus A'$. Then $f: A \cup B \to A$ is a bijection which proves the statement.

## Question 5

__Suppose that $|A_n| = |\mathbb{R}|$, for $n = 1, 2, 3, \dots$. Prove that $|\bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty A_n| = |\mathbb{R}|$.__

!!! success "Proof"

    Let $|A_i| = |[i - 1, i)|$ which we know has cardinality $|\mathbb{R}|$ since $|[0, 1)| = |\mathbb{R}|$ from lectures. Then $|\bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty| = |[0, n)]$ which again has cardinality $|\mathbb{R}|$.

## Question 6

__Prove that $|\mathbb{R}| = |[0, 1)| = |\mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q}|$.__

!!! success "Proof"

    To prove that $|\mathbb{R}| = |[0, 1)|$ we construct the following map $f: [0, 1) \to (0, 1); f\left(\frac{1}{n}\right) = \frac{1}{n + 1}, f(x \neq \frac{1}{n}) = x$. This is a bijection which proves that $|(0, 1)| = |(0, 1]|$. Now construct $g: (0, 1) \to \mathbb{R}, g(x) = \tan(x - \frac{\pi}{2})$ which is also a bijection. Since the compositions of bijections is bijective, the map $(g \circ f)$ provides a bijection from $[0, 1) \to \mathbb{R}$.

    To prove $|\mathbb{R}| = |\mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q}|$. We prove the following

    - $|\mathbb{R}| \leq |\mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q}|$. Let $f: \mathbb{R} \to (\mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q}), f(x) = e^x + \pi$. This is clearly injective since $e^x$ is.
    - $|\mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q}| \leq |\mathbb{R}|$. Let $f: (\mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q}) \to \mathbb{R}, f(x) = x$. This is also injective.

    Hence by Schroeder-Bernstein's Theorem we have $|\mathbb{R}| = |\mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q}|$.

## Question 7

__Decide whether the following sets are countable or uncountable. Be clear about whether you are using the definition or a theorem.__

1. __$\mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{Q}$__
2. The set $B$ of all open intervals of $\mathbb{R}$ with rational endpoints.
3. $\mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$, the set of all sequences of natural numbers.
4. The set $\mathcal{M}$ of all matrices of any (finite) size which have integer entries.
5. The set $C$ of all $x \in [0, 1]$ whose decimal expansion contains no 7s.
6. The set of all polynomials with rational coefficients.
7. The set of convergent sequences of rational numbers.

!!! success "Proof Sketch"

    1. Uncountable since $\mathbb{R}$ is uncountable.
    2. $B = \{(p, q) \mid p, q \in \mathbb{Q} \}. |B| = \mathbb{Q} \times \mathbb{Q}$ which is a finite product of countable sets and thus is countable.
    3. From lectures this is uncountable. Also $\mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N} \geq 2^\mathbb{N}$ and $2^\mathbb{N}$ is uncountable.
    4. This is equivalent to a finite product of $\mathbb{Z}$ where you just convert the matrix into a tuple. This is countable.
    5. The possible digits for each decimal are $\{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9\}$. There are at most $\mathbb{N}$ decimal points. We can write the possible decimal expansions as a list where each entry in the tuple is a decimal place: $\{(0, 0, \dots), (1, 0, \dots), \dots, (0, 1, 0, \dots), (0, 2, 0, \dots), \dots \},$ which by definition is countable. Note that this has cardinality equivalent to $|9^\mathbb{N}|$.
    6. This is equivalent to $\mathbb{Q}^\mathbb{N}$ which has cardinality equivalent to $|\mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}|$ which from 2. is uncountable.
    7. Consider a subset starting with $\{\{1, 1/2, 1/4, \dots\}, \{1, 1/3, 1/9, \dots\}, \dots\}$. There are $\mathbb{N}$ such sequences each with $\mathbb{Q}$ elements. Meaning this structure is similar to $\mathbb{Q}^\mathbb{N}$ which is uncountable.

## Question 8

1. __Suppose that $\{x_n \}_{n = 1}^\infty$ is a sequence of positive numbers such that $\sum_{n = 1}^\infty x_n$ converges. Prove that for every $\epsilon > 0$, the set $\{n : x_n \geq \epsilon \}$ is finite.__
2. __Let $f: [0, 1] \to (0, \infty)$. Prove that there exists some $\epsilon > 0$ such that $\{ x \in [0, 1]: f(x) \geq \epsilon \}$ is uncountable.__
3. __Explain why this means that you can only make some sense of $\sum_{x \in [0, 1]} f(x)$ if $f(x) = 0$ except on a countable set.__

!!! success "Solution"

    1. Since the series $\sum x_n$ converges and all $x_n > 0$, for every $\epsilon > 0$, there exists $N \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $\sum_{n > N} x_n < \epsilon$. In particular, for $n > N$, each $x_n < \epsilon$; otherwise if $x_n \geq \epsilon$ for some $n > N$, then $\sum_{n > N} x_n \geq x_n \geq \epsilon$, which contradicts the tail bound. Hence, all $x_n > \epsilon$ must occur for $n \leq N$. So $A_\epsilon$ is finite.
    2. Let $f: [0, 1] \to (0, \infty)$. Define $E_n = \{x \in [0, 1] \mid f(x) \geq \frac{1}{n}\}$ for $n \in \mathbb{N}$. Since $f(x) > 0$, we have $[0, 1] = \bigcup_{n = 1}^\infty E_n$. As $[0, 1]$ is uncountable, if all $E_n$ where countable, then their countable union would be countable, a contradiction. Thus some $E_n$ is uncountable. Set $\epsilon = \frac{1}{n}$ for such an $n$. Then $\{x \in [0, 1] \mid f(x) \geq \epsilon\} = E_n$ is uncountable.
    3. On a countable set, the sum converges. This does not apply to uncountable sets, and hence we can't exactly find the sum. If $f(x) = 0$ when trivially the sum will just be 0.

## Question 9

__Let $S$ be a countable subset of $[0, 1]$. Define an increasing function $f: [0, 1] \to [0, 1]$ whose set of discontinuities is $S$.__

!!! success "Solution"

    Let $S = \{s_1, s_2, s_3, \dots\} \subseteq [0, 1]$ be a countable susbet, enumerate without repetition. Choose a sequence of positive numbers $(a_n)_{n=1}^\infty$ such that

    \[
        a_n > 0, \quad \text{ and } \quad \sum_{n = 1}^\infty a_n = 1.
    \]

    Define the function $f:[0,1] \to [0,1]$ by

    \[
        f(x) = \sum_{\substack{n = 1 \\ s_n < x}}^\infty a_n.
    \]

    Check that $f$ is increasing, bounded between $[0, 1]$, continuous for every $x \notin S$ and at each point $s_n \in S$, $f$ has a jump discontinuity of size $a_n$:

    \[
        \lim_{x \to s_n^-} f(x) = \sum_{\substack{k = 1 \\ s_k < s_n}}^\infty a_k, \quad \lim_{x \to s_n^+} f(x) = \sum_{\substack{k = 1 \\ s_k \leq s_n}}^\infty a_k,
    \]

    so the jump is $f(s_n^+) - f(s_n^-) = a_n$.