# Problem Sheet 4

## Question 1

**For the following sequences of functions, discuss the convergence of $\{f_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$ in the pointwise, uniform, $L^2$ and $L^1$ senses.**

1. $f_n: \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}, f_n(x) = e^{-(x - n)^2}$.
2. $f_n: [0, 1] \to \mathbb{R}, f_n(x) = \frac{xe^{-x/n}}{n}$.
3. $f_n: [0, 2\pi] \to \mathbb{R}, f_n(x) = \sin(x + \frac{1}{n})$.
4. $f_n: [-1, 1] \to \mathbb{R}, f_n(x) = \tan^{-1}(nx)$.
<!-- 5. $f_n = \{z \in \mathbb{C}: |z| = 1\} \to \mathbb{R}, f_n(z) = \frac{1}{1 + n^2|z - e^{in}}$. **(Very hard!)** -->

!!! success "Solution"

    1. This is a ''travelling hump'' graph, which converges pointwise to 0. However it cannot converge uniformly since if it did, it would converge to the pointwise limit, but $\lVert f_n \rVert_\infty = 1$ for all $n$.

        It also does not converge in the $L^1$ sense since it is not Cauchy. Note that $\int_\mathbb{R} f_n(x) \, dx = \sqrt{\pi} > 1$, and so there exists $r > 0$ such that $\int_{n - r}^{n + r} f_n(x) = \sqrt{\pi} - \frac{1}{2}$. Take any $m \in \mathbb{Z}^+$ such that $m > n + 2r$. Then, using the symmetries of $f_n$ and $f_m$,

        \begin{align*}
            d_1(f_n, f_m) &= \int_\mathbb{R} |f_n(x) - f_m(x)| \, dx \\
            &\geq \int_{n - r}^{n + r} (f_n(x) - f_m(x)) \, dx + \int_{m - r}^{m + r} (f_m(x) - f_n(x)) \, dx \\
            &\geq \left(\sqrt{n} - \frac{1}{2}\right) - \frac{1}{2} + \left(\sqrt{\pi} - \frac{1}{2}\right) - \frac{1}{2} \\
            &= 2(\sqrt{n} - 1) > 0.
        \end{align*}
    2. Converges uniformly to 0 since

        \[
            f_n(x) = \frac{xe^{-x/n}}{n} \leq \frac{xe^0}{n} \leq \frac{1}{n},
        \]

        and thus $\lVert f_n \rVert_\infty \to 0$. Since we are on a compact interval, we also have $L^1$ and $L^2$ convergence.
    3. Converges uniformly to $\sin$ since the inequality

        \[
            |\sin(x + \frac{1}{n}) - \sin(x)| = 2|\cos(\frac{2x + n}{2n}) \sin(\frac{1}{2n})| \leq \frac{1}{n}
        \]

        holds uniformly for $x \in [0, 2\pi]$. Since we're on $[0, 2\pi]$, we also have $L^1$ and $L^2$ convergence. If the domain was $\mathbb{R}$, then we have uniform convergence but NOT $L^1$ nor $L^2$.
    4. Converges pointwise of $f$ to $\frac{\pi}{2}$ for $x > 0$, $-\frac{\pi}{2}$ for $x < 0$ and 0 if $x = 0$. Pointwise limit is not continuous so cannot converge uniformly. There is convergence to the above function in both $L^1$ and $L^2$ done by examining the integral.



## Question 2

**Give examples of the following if they exist:**

1. **A sequence that converges in $\ell^\infty$ but not in $\ell^2$.**
2. **A sequence that converges in $\ell^2$ but not in $\ell^1$.**
3. **A sequence of functions on $[0, 1]$ that converges in the $L^1$ sense but not in the $L^2$ sense.**
4. **A sequence of functions on $[0, 1]$ that converges in the $L^2$ sense but not in the $L^1$ sense.**

!!! success "Solution"

    1. $\mathbf{x}_n = (1, \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}, \dots, \frac{1}{\sqrt{n}}, 0, 0, \dots)$. Let $\mathbf{x} = (1, \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}, \dots)$. Then $\lVert \mathbf{x} - \mathbf{x}_n \rVert_\infty = \frac{1}{\sqrt{n}} \to 0$, but in $\ell^2$, $\{\mathbf{x}_n\}_{n = 1}^\infty$ is unbounded, and hence not Cauchy.
    2. $\mathbf{x}_n = (1, \frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{3}, \dots, \frac{1}{n}, 0, 0, \dots)$.
    3. $f_n = \sqrt{n}\chi_{[0, 1/n]}$:

        \begin{align*}
            d_1(f_n, 0) &= \int_0^{1/n} \sqrt{n} \, dt = \frac{1}{\sqrt{n}} \to 0 \\
            d_2(f_n, f_{2n}) &\geq \int_{1 / (2n)}^{1 / n} \sqrt{n}^2 \, dt = \frac{(\sqrt{2} - 1)^2}{2} + \frac{1}{2}.
        \end{align*}

    4. $L^2$ converges implies $L^1$ on an interval by Cauchy-Schwartz inequality:

        \[
            \left(\int_0^1 |f_n(t) - f(t)| \, dt \right)^2 \leq \left(\int_0^1 |f_n(t) - f(t)|^2 \, dt \right)\left(\int_0^1 1^2 \, dt\right) = \int_0^1 |f_n(t) - f(t)|^2 \, dt.
        \]

## Question 3

## Question 4

## Question 5

**Given an example to show that you can have $f_n \to f$ uniformly on $[0, \infty)$ but**

\[ \int_0^\infty f_n(t) \, dt \not\to \int_0^\infty f(t) \, dt. \]

!!! success "Solution"

    \[ f_n(x) = \frac{e^{-nx}}{n} \]

## Question 6

**Consider the sequence of functions $f_n: \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}, n = 1, 2, 3, \dots$ defined by**

\[ f_n(x) = \frac{x}{2 + \sqrt{n}x^2, x \in \mathbb{R}}. \]

1. **Does this sequence converge pointwise and/or uniformly on $\mathbb{R}$?**
2. **Does this sequence of derivatives $f_n'(x)$ converge pointwise and/or uniformly on $\mathbb{R}$?**

!!! success "Solution"

    1. For fixed $x \in \mathbb{R}, f_n(x) \to 0$, and so $f_n$ converges to 0 pointwise. If it converges uniformly, then the limit must also be 0. Each $f_n$ is differentiable with derivative

        \[f_n'(x) = \frac{2 - \sqrt{n} x^2}{(2 + \sqrt{n} x^2)^2},\]

        and has a stationary point at $x = \sqrt{2 / \sqrt{n}}$, which is a local max. Then we see that

        \[f_n(\sqrt{2 / \sqrt{n}}) = \frac{\sqrt{2 / \sqrt{n}}}{2 + \sqrt{n}(2 / \sqrt{n})} = \frac{\sqrt{2}}{4n^{1/4}} \to 0.\]

        So $f_n \to 0$ uniformly.
    2. For fixed $x \neq 0$, we will have that $f_n'(x) \to 0$ and $f_n'(0) = 0.5$ for all $n$. Each $f_n'$ is continuous, and thus cannot converge uniformly.

## Question 7