# Problem Sheet 7

## Question 1

**Which of the following sets $Y$ are compact in the given space $(X, \tau)$?**

1. **$Y = \mathbb{Z}$ in $(\mathbb{Q}, |\cdot|)$.**
2. **$Y = \mathbb{Z}$ in $\mathbb{R}$ with the co-countable topology.**
3. **$Y = \{(\sin 3t, \cos 2t, \sin 5t) \in \mathbb{R} : t \in [0, 2\pi]\}$ in $(\mathbb{R}, |\cdot|)$.**
4. **$Y = \{e^{ik} : k \in \mathbb{Z}\}$ in $(\mathbb{C}, |\cdot|)$.**
5. **$Y = \{A \in M_{44}(\mathbb{R}) : det(A) = 1\}$ in $(M_{44}(\mathbb{R}), \lVert \cdot \rVert_{op})$.**
6. **$Y = \{f \in C^1[0, 1] : f(0) = 0, \lVert f' \rVert_\infty \leq 3\}$ in $(C[0, 1], \lVert \cdot \rVert_\infty)$.**

!!! success "Solution"

    1. No, since it is not bounded.
    2. No, take $\{ \mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Z} \cup \{n\}\}_{n \in \mathbb{Z}}$.
    3. Yes.
    4. No, as it is not closed.
    5. No, as it is unbounded. Consider upper-triangular matrices with diagonal entries all equal to 1.
    6. No, since it is not closed.

## Question 2

**Give an example of a noncompact topological space in which a subset is compact if and only if it is finite.**

!!! success "Solution"

    Let $X$ be an infinite set. An example of a noncompact space in which the compact sets are exactly the finite ones would be any infinite space with the discrete topology on $X$. Also, we could cocountable topology on $X$. Suppose that $Y$ is an infinite subset of $X$ with countably infinite subset $C = \{c_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$. Then $\{ (X \setminus C) \cup \{c_n\}\}_{n = 1}^\infty$ is an open cover of $Y$ without a finite subcover.

## Question 3

**Let $X = \mathbb{R}$ with the left-ray topology**

\[ \tau = \{\emptyset, \mathbb{R}\} \cup \{(-\infty, a) : a \in \mathbb{R}\}. \]

**What are the compact subsets of $X$?**

!!! success "Solution"

    A set is compact in $\tau$ precisely when it is bounded from above and contains its supremum.

    If a set is not bounded from above, then $\{(-\infty, n)\}_{n \in \mathbb{N}}$ is an open cover without a finite subcover. If it is bounded from above but does not contains its supremum, then letting $s$ denote the supremum of the set, we have that $\{(-\infty, s - \frac{1}{n})\}_{n \in \mathbb{Z}^+}$ is an open cover with a no finite subcover.

    Conversely, suppose that a set is bounded from above and contains its supremum. Let $\{(-\infty, a_i)\}_{i \in I}$ be an open cover of such a set with supremum $M$. Then $I' = \{i \in I: a_i > s\}$ is non-empty, and so we can take $\{(-\infty, a_i)\}$ as a finite subcover for some $i \in I'$.

## Question 4

**Let $X = \mathbb{Q} \cap [0, 1]$ with the usual metric topology. Prove directly from the definition that $X$ is not compact.**

!!! success "Solution"

    Let $\{ q_n \}_{n = 1}^\infty$ be an enumeration of the rationals, and $I_n$ an interval containing $q_n$ of length at most $2^{-n}$. Then $\{I_n\}_{n = 1}^\infty$ is an open cover of $\mathbb{Q} \cap [0, 1]$ but any finite subcover $\{I_{n_k}\}_{k = 1}^m$ satisfies

    \[\mathrm{Length}\left(\bigcup_{k = 1}^m I_{n_k}\right) \leq \sum_{k = 1}^m \mathrm{Length}(I_{n_k}) \leq \sum_{k = 1}^m 2^{-n_k} < \sum_{n = 1}^\infty 2^{-n} = 1, \]

    and thus cannot cover all of $\mathbb{Q} \cap [0, 1]$.

<!-- ## Question 5

**Can a set be open and compact?**

!!! success "Solution" -->

## Question 6

**Let $X$ be a set and let $\tau_1$ and $\tau_2$ be two topologies on $X$ such that $\tau_1 \subseteq \tau_2$. Does compactness of $X$ in either $\tau_1$ or $\tau_2$ imply compactness in the other?**

!!! success "Solution"

    $\tau_1 \subseteq \tau_2$. If $X$ is compact in $\tau_2$, then it is also compact in $\tau_1$. Indeed, any open cover in $\tau_1$ is also an open cover in $\tau_2$, upon which a finite subcover can be extracted.

## Question 7

**Give an example of a family $\{F_\alpha\}_{\alpha \in A}$ of subsets of $\mathbb{R}$ which has empty intersection, but for which every finite subfamily has non-empty intersection. Do this in the open unit disk in the plane.**

!!! success "Solution"

    $\{(-\frac{1}{n}, \frac{1}{n}) \setminus \{0\}\}_{n = 1}^\infty$ has empty intersection, but any finite subcollection has non-empty intersection.

## Question 9

**Let $(X, d)$ be metric space, and let $Y \subseteq X$ be a subset. Show that the following are equivalent.**

1. **For any $\epsilon > 0, Y$ can be covered by finitely many $\epsilon$-balls with centers in $Y$.**
2. **For any $\epsilon > 0, Y$ can be covered by finitely many $\epsilon$-balls with centers in $X$.**

!!! success "Solution"

    Clearly i) implies ii), so given $\epsilon > 0$, let $n \in \mathbb{Z}^+$ and $\{x_i\}_{i = 1}^n$ be such that $Y \subseteq \bigcup_{i = 1}^n B(x_i, \frac{\epsilon}{2})$. Without loss, assume that $Y \cap B(x_i, \frac{\epsilon}{2}) \neq \emptyset$ for all $i$ and let $z_i \in Y \cap B(x_i, \frac{\epsilon}{2})$. Let $f: Y \to \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$ be a function such that $y \in B(x_{f(y)}, \frac{\epsilon}{2})$. Then

    \[ d(y, z_{f(y)}) \leq d(y, x_{f(y)}) + d(x_{f(y)}, z_{f(y)}) < \frac{\epsilon}{2} + \frac{\epsilon}{2} = \epsilon. \]

    So $Y \subseteq \bigcup_{i = 1}^n B(z_i, \epsilon)$.

## Question 12

**Give an example of a closed and bounded subset of $C[0, 1]$ which is not compact. Prove your answer!**

!!! success "Solution"

    The closed unit ball of $C[0, 1]$ is not compact. Considering spike functions with mutually disjoint supports will produce a bounded sequence with no convergent subsequence since $\lVert f_{n_k} - f_{n_\ell} \rVert_\infty = 1$.

    The closed unit ball of a normed space if compact if and only if it the space is finite dimensional.
