# Problem Sheet 2

## Question 1

**Show that $d_1(f, g) = \int_0^1 |f(t) - g(t)| \, dt$ and $d_2(f, g) = \left(\int_0^1 |f(t) - g(t)|^2 \, dt \right)^{1/2}$ are both metrics on the set $C[0,1]$.**

!!! success "Solution"

    We first prove $d_1$ is a metric on the set $C[0, 1]$.

    - For positive definiteness we prove the contrapositive, that is suppose that $(f - g)(t) \neq 0$ for some $t \in [0, 1]$. As $f - g$ is continuous, then there is some $\delta$ such that for all $x \in [0, 1] \cap [t - \delta, t + \delta]$, we have that

        \[|(f - g)(x) - (f - g)(t)| < |(f - g)(t)| / 2 \implies |(f - g)(x)| > |(f - g)(t)| / 2.\]

        And so we have that,

        \[d_1(f, g) \geq \int_{[0, 1] \cap [t - \delta, t + \delta]} |(f - g)(x)| \, dx > \delta|(f - g)(t)| / 2 > 0.\]
    - For symmetry, clearly we have,

        \[d_1(f, g) = \int_0^1 |f(t) - g(t)| \, dt = \int_0^1 |g(t) - f(t)| \, dt = d_1(g, f).\]

    - For triangle inequality for $d_1$ we use the triangle inequality on real numbers to give,

        \[d_1(f, g) + d_1(g, h) = \int_0^1 |f(t) - g(t)| \, dt + \int_0^1 |g(t) - h(t)| \, dt = \int_0^1 |f(t) - g(t)| + |g(t) - h(t)| \, dt \geq \int_0^1 |f(t) - h(t)| = d_1(f, h).\]

    Very similar ideas follow for proving $d_2$ is a metric.

## Question 3

**Which of the following are metrics on $\mathbb{R}^n$?**

1. $d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = \left| |\sum_{j = 1}^n x_j| - |\sum_{j = 1}^n y_j| \right|$.
2. $d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = \sum_{j = 1}^n \sqrt{|x_j - y_j}$.
3. $d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = \sum_{j = 1}^n (x_j - y_j)^2$.

!!! success "Proof"

    1. No. Consider $\mathbf{x} = (0, 1)$ and $\mathbf{y} = (1, 0)$ in $\mathbb{R}^2$. Then $d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = |1 - 1| = 0$ but $\mathbf{x} \neq \mathbf{y}$.
    2. Yes. Positive definiteness and symmetry are clear. We can show triangle inequality by applying the $\sqrt{a + b} \leq \sqrt{a} + \sqrt{b}$ inequality on real numbers, element wise.
    3. No. Consider $d((1, 0), (-1, 0)) = 4 > d((1, 0), (0, 0)) + d((0, 0), (-1, 0)) = 1  + 1 = 2$.

## Question 5.

**Suppose that $(X, d)$ is a metric space and that $\alpha \geq 0$. Define $d'(x, y) = d(x, y)^\alpha$. For which $\alpha$ are you guaranteed that $d'$ is a metric on $X$?**

!!! success "Proof"

    From Question 3, it looks as if $0 < \alpha \leq 1$ should be the values we require. Notably if $\alpha = 1$ then the result follows. Now suppose that $0 < \alpha < 1$. For positive definiteness and symmetric, these follow for any $\alpha > 0$ we now we show triangle inequality.

    We need $d(x, z)^\alpha \leq d(x, y)^\alpha + d(y, z)^\alpha$. However since $d(a, b) \in \mathbb{R}$ it suffices to show for all $a, b \geq 0$

    \[(a + b)^\alpha \leq a^\alpha + b^\alpha.\]

    Fix $b \geq 0$ and consider $f : \mathbb{R}^+ \to \mathbb{R}^+$ defined by $f(a) = a^\alpha + b^\alpha - (a + b)^\alpha$. Then

    \[f'(a) = \alpha a^{\alpha - 1} - \alpha(a + b)^{\alpha - 1} = \alpha(a^{\alpha - 1} - (a + b)^{\alpha - 1}).\]

    For $0 < \alpha \leq 1$ we have $a^{\alpha - 1} \geq (a + b)^{\alpha - 1}$ hence $f'(a) > 0$ for all $a$. Thus $f(a) > 0$ for all $a > 0$ since $f(0^{-}) = 0$.

    However if $\alpha > 1$, then $d'$ may or may not be a metric. For example if $d$ is the discrete metric, then $d' = d$. But similar to Question 3c), if we consider $(\mathbb{R}, \left| \cdot \right|)$, then take $x = 1, y = -1$ and $z = 0$. Then $d'(x, y) = 2^\alpha > 2 = d'(x, z) + d'(y, z) = 1$.

## Question 6

**Let $X = C[0, 1]$ under the metric $d_\infty$. Let**

\[ Y = \{ f \in C[0, 1] : f(0) \neq 0\}.\]

1. **Prove that $Y$ is open in $(C[0, 1], d_\infty)$**
2. **Is $Y$ open in $(C[0, 1], d_1)?$**

!!! success "Solution"

    1. We show that $Y = \mathrm{Int}(Y)$. The reverse direction is obvious. Now let $f \in Y$, then there is some $g \in B(f, |f(0)|)$.

        \begin{align*}
            |g(0)| &= |f(0) - (f(0) - g(0))| \\
            &\geq |f(0)| - |f(0) - g(0)| \\
            &\geq |f(0)| - d_\infty (f,g) \\
            &> |f(0)| - |f(0)| \\
            &= 0
        \end{align*}

        hence $g \in Y$. Thus $Y$ is open in $(X, d_\infty)$.
    2. We claim that $Y$ is open in $(X, d_1)$. The sequence $(f_n)_{n=1}^\infty$ where $f_n(t) = (1 - t)^n$ is in $Y$ and converges to $0$ in $d_1$ but $0 \notin Y$.

## Question 7

**Let $X = \mathbb{R}^2$ with the usual metric. For each of the following sets, identify the interior points and the boundary points, and decide whether the set is open, closed or neither.**

1. $Y_1 = \{(x, y) \in \mathbb{R}^2: \sin x < y < \cos x\}$,
2. $Y_2 = \mathbb{Q} \times \mathbb{R}$,
3. $Y_3 = \{(\cos \frac{1}{t}, t) : t > 0\}$,
4. $Y_4 = \cup_{k=1}^\infty B((\frac{1}{k}, 0), \frac{1}{3k^2})$.

!!! success "Solution"

    1. Open since we can define continuous functions $f_1, f_2 : \mathbb{R}^2 \to \mathbb{R}$ by $f_1(x, y) = y - \sin x$ and $f_2(x, y) = y - \cos x$. Then $Y_1 = f_1^{-1}((0, \infty)) \cap f_2^{-1}((-\infty, 0))$. So $\mathrm{Int}(Y_1) = Y_1$. The boundary can be identified as

        \[\mathrm{Bd}(Y_1) = \{(x, y) : \sin x = y \leq \cos x\} \cup \{(x, y) : \sin x \leq y = \cos x\}.\]
    2. No interior points and the boundary is $\mathbb{R}^2$. Since between any two rational numbers you can find a real number. Neither open nor closed.
    3. No interior, and the boundary is $Y_3 \cup [-1, 1] \times \{0\}$ so neither open nor closed.
    4. This is the union of open balls so clearly $Y_4$ is open. We can see that its boundary includes $\{(0, 0)\}$. Observe that the distance between the $k$th ball and the $(k + 1)$th ball is

        \[\frac{1}{k} - \frac{1}{3k^2} - \left(\frac{1}{k + 1} + \frac{1}{3(k + 1)^2} \right) = \frac{3k^2 + k - 1}{3k^2(k + 1)^2}.\]

        which is positive for $k \geq 1$, and so the boundary of $Y_4$ is the circumferences of all the circles unioned with $\{(0, 0)\}$.

## Question 9

**Prove that a finite union of closed sets is closed. Prove that the intersection of closed sets is closed.**

!!! success "Solution"

    Let

    \[
        F = \bigcup_{k = 1}^n F_k
    \]

    be the union of a finite number of closed sets $F_k$, and suppose $x$ does not belong to $F$. Then $x$ does not belong to any of the sets $F_k$ and hence cannot be a limit point of any of them. But then, for every $k$, there is a ball $B(x, \epsilon_k)$ containing no more than a finite number of points of $F_k$. Choosing

    \[
        \epsilon = \min \{ \epsilon_1, \dots, \epsilon_n \},
    \]

    we get a ball $B(x, \epsilon)$ so that $x$ cannot be a limit point of $F$. This proves that a point $x \notin F$ cannot be a limit point of $F$. Therefore $F$ is closed.

    Given arbitrary number of closed sets $F_{\alpha}$ indexed by a parameter $\alpha$, let $x$ be a limit point of the intersection

    \[
        F = \bigcap_\alpha F_{alpha}.
    \]

    Then any ball $B(x, \epsilon)$ contains infinitely many points of $F$, and hence infinitely many points of each $F_\alpha$. Therefore $x$ is a limit point of each $F_\alpha$ and hence belongs to each $F_\alpha$, since the sets $F_\alpha$ are all closed. It followws that $x \in F$, and hence that $F$ itself is closed.

## Question 10

**Give examples of a metric space $(X, d)$ and a infinite family of closed sets $\{E_j\}_{j = 1}^\infty$ in $X$ such that**

1. $\cup_{j = 1}^\infty E_j$ is not closed,
2. $\cup_{j = 1}^\infty E_j$ is closed,
3. $\cup_{j = 1}^\infty E_j$ is open and closed.

!!! success "Solution"

    We take the metric space $(\mathbb{R}, |\cdot|)$ for all of the parts:

    1. $E_j = [\frac{1}{j}, j]$ gives $\cup_{j = 1}^\infty E_j = (0, \infty)$, which is not closed.
    2. $E_j = [0, 1]$ gives $\cup_{j = 1}^\infty E_j = [0, 1]$, which is closed.
    3. $E_j = [-j, j]$ gives $\cup_{j = 1}^\infty E_j = \mathbb{R}$, which both open and closed.

## Question 12

**Are there any metric spaces in which there are exactly 5 sets which are both open and closed? What about 6 open and closed sets?**

!!! success "Solution"

    Let $(X, d)$ be a metric space. Then obviously we have that $\emptyset$ and $X$ are both open and closed. Now observe that sets which are both open and closed must occur in pairs. Since if $A$ is closed and open, then $A^c$ is also closed and open. So a metric space with exactly 5 clopen sets is impossible.

    If a metric space has a finite number of clopen sets, then it must be a power of 2. Write $X \sqcup_{i = 1}^n A_i$ where $A_i$ is a clopen set. Then there are $2^n$ ways to take unions of the $A_i$s, all of which are clopen. So there can also not be 6.

## Question 15

1. **Suppose that $f: \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{Z}$ (with their usual metrics). Can $f$ be continuous?**
2. **Suppose that $f: \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{R}$. Can $f$ be continuous? Must $f$ be continuous?**

!!! success "Solution"

    1. Only if $f$ is constant.
    2. Every $f$ is continuous.
