# Problem Sheet 3

## Question 1

**In each of the following non-complete spaces, give examples of a nonconvergent Cauchy sequence.**

1. **$X = c_00$, the space of sequences which are eventually zero, under $d_\infty(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = \sup_k |x_k - y_k|$.**
2. **$X = \ell^1$ under $d_2(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y}) = \left(\sum_{k = 1}^\infty |x_k - y_k|^2 \right)^{1 / 2}$.**
3. **$X = C^1[0, 1]$, the space of all functions $f: [0, 1] \to \mathbb{R}$ such that $f' \in C[0, 1]$, with the metric $d_\infty(f, g) = \lVert f - g \rVert_\infty = \sup_{t \in [0, 1]} |f(t) - g(t)|$.**

!!! success "Solution"

    1. In $(c_{00}, \lVert \cdot \rVert_\infty)$, the sequence $(x_n)_{n = 1}^\infty$ defined by $x_n = (1, \frac{1}{2}, \dots, \frac{1}{n}, 0, 0, \dots)$ is Cauchy since if $m > n$, then $\lVert x_n - x_m \rVert$_\infty = \frac{1}{n + 1} \to 0$, but it is not convergent since $(1, \frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{3}, \dots) \notin c_{00}$.
    2. In $(\ell^1, \lVert \cdot \rVert_2)$, we take the same sequence as in part 1. This is Cauchy since if $m > n$, then

        \[\lVert x_n - x_m \rVert = \sum_{k = n + 1}^m \frac{1}{k^2} < \sum_{k = n + 1}^\infty \frac{1}{k^2} \to 0 \text{ as } m, n \to \infty.\]

        However, the sequence does not converge since $(1, \frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{3}, \dots) \notin \ell^1$.
    3. In $(C^[0, 1], \lVert \cdot \rVert_\infty)$, the sequence $(f_n)_{n = 1}^\infty$ defined by $f_n(x) = \sqrt{(x - \frac{1}{2})^2 + \frac{1}{n}}$ is Cauchy but is not convergent since the limit is $f \notin C^1 [0, 1]$ defined by $f(x) = |x - \frac{1}{2}|$.

## Question 2

**Is $(\mathbb{Z}, |\cdot|)$ complete?**

!!! success "Solution"

    Any Cauchy sequence in $(\mathbb{Z}, |\cdot|)$ must be eventually constant since the terms must become arbitrarily close together. As such each Cauchy sequence converges in $(\mathbb{Z}, |\cdot|)$ hence $(\mathbb{Z}, |\cdot|)$ is complete.

## Question 3

**Adapt the proof that $C[0, 1]$ is complete to prove that the set $\ell^\infty$ of all bounded sequences under the norm $\lVert (x_1, x_2, \dots)\rVert = \sup_k |x_k|$ is complete.**

!!! success "Solution"

    Suppose that $(x_n)_{n = 1}^\infty$ is a Cauchy sequence in $(\ell^\infty, \lVert \cdot \rVert_\infty)$. Then for each $k \in \mathbb{Z}^+, (x_{n, k})_{n = 1}^\infty$ is a Cauchy sequence in $\mathbb{R}$. As $\mathbb{R}$ is complete, there is a number $L_k \in \mathbb{R}$ such that $\lim_{n \to \infty} x_{n, k} = L_k$.

    We claim that $(x_n)_{n = 1}^\infty$ converges to $L = (L_k)_{k = 1}^\infty$ uniformly.

    Fix $\epsilon > 0$. Then there is an $N_\epsilon \in \mathbb{Z}^+$ such that $\lVert x_n - x_m \rVert < \frac{\epsilon}{2}$ for all $m, n > N_\epsilon$. Fix $k \in \mathbb{Z}^+$. Then there is an $m_{\epsilon, k} > N_\epsilon$ such that $|x_{m_{\epsilon, k}} - L_k| < \frac{\epsilon}{2}$. Hence, for $n > N_\epsilon$, we have that

    \[|x_{n, k} - L_k| \leq |x_{n, k} - x_{m_{\epsilon, k}}| + |x_{m_{\epsilon, k}} - L_k| < \lVert x_n - x_{m_{\epsilon, k}} \rVert_\infty + \frac{\epsilon}{2} < \epsilon.\]

    As $k$ was arbitrary, we have that $\lVert x_n - L \rVert_\infty = \sup_{k \in \mathbb{Z}^+} \lVert x_{n, k} - L_k \rVert \leq \epsilon$ for all $n > N_\epsilon$, and thus $(x_n)_{n = 1}^\infty$ converges to $L$ uniformly. Also, since a Cauchy sequence is bounded, $M = \sup_n \lVert x_n \rVert_\infty$ exists, and so the above equation shows that

    \begin{align*}
        & |L_k| < \epsilon + |x_{n_k}| \leq \epsilon + \lVert x_n \rVert_\infty \leq \epsilon + M \\
        \implies & \lVert L \rVert_\infty = \sup_k |L_k| \leq \epsilon + M.
    \end{align*}

    As this si true for all $\epsilon > 0$, we also have that $\lVert L \rVert_\infty \leq M$. In fact, the above shows that $\lVert L \rVert_\infty = \lim_{n \to \infty} \lVert x_n \rVert_\infty$.) So $L \in \ell^\infty$ as it is a bounded sequence, and $(\ell^\infty, \lVert \cdot \rVert_\infty)$ is complete.

## Question 4

**Two metric spaces $(X, d_X)$ and $(Y, d_Y)$ are said to be homeomorphic if there exists a bijection $f: X \to Y$ (called a homeomorphism) which is continuous and whose inverse $f^{-1}: Y \to X$ is also continuous. (Note that $f^{-1}$ exists for any bijection!).**

**Suppose that $f: X \to Y$ is a homeomorphism.**

1. **Explain why $U \subseteq X$ is open (in $(X, d_X)$) if and only if $f(U) \subseteq Y$ is open (in $(Y, d_Y)$).**
2. **Consider the sets $\mathbb{R}, (0, \infty)$ and $[0, \infty)$ with the usual metric. Which, if any, of these pairs of spaces are homeomorphic. Prove your answer.**
3. **Prove or give counterexamples:**

    1. **$X$ is bounded if and only if $Y$ is bounded.**
    2. **$X$ is complete if and only if $Y$ is complete.**

!!! success "Solution"

    1. Since $f: X \to Y$ is a homeomorphism then $g = f^{-1}: Y \to X$ is continuous. If $U$ is open in $X$, then $f(U) = g^{-1}(U)$ is open since $g^{-1}$ is continuous. Similarly, if $f(U)$ is open in $Y$, then $ = f^{-1}(f(U))$ is open in $X$ since $f$ is continuous.
    2. $\mathbb{R}$ and $(0, \infty)$ are homeomorphic since $\exp : \mathbb{R} \to (0, \infty)$ and $\ln : (0, \infty) \to \mathbb{R}$ are continuous. However, $[0, \infty)$ cannot be homeomorphic to any of $\mathbb{R}$ or $(0, \infty)$. Suppose that $h: [0, \infty) \to \mathbb{R}$ is a homeomorphism. Then the restriction of $h$ to $(0, \infty)$ is a homeomorphism onto $\mathbb{R} \setminus \{h(0)\}$. But $\mathbb{R} \setminus \{h(0)\}$ is not path-connected, contradicting the fact that continuous functions preserve path-connected sets.
    3. Both are incorrect, we provide counterexamples:

        1. $(0, 1)$ is bounded in $(0, \infty)$ but $\ln((0, 1)) = (-\infty, 0)$ which is unbounded in $\mathbb{R}$.
        2. $\mathbb{R}$ is complete but $(0, \infty)$ is not.

<!-- ## Question 7 -->
<!-- ## Question 8 -->

## Question 11

**Consider the ODE**

\[ (1) = \begin{cases} y' = x + \cos(x + 3y) \\ y(0) = 1 \end{cases}\]

**Using the notation of the notes, let $G = (-1, 1) \times (0, 2)$. Find values of $K$ and $M$ for the boundedness conditions (A) and (B) for $g$ on $G$. Now choose $\delta$ as in the proof of Picard's Theorem and therefore identify the set $X_1 \subseteq C[-\delta, \delta]$ on which the contradiction mapping is defined (and in which the solution of the ODE lies).**

!!! success "Solution"

    First, we find that

    \[|g(x, y)| = |x + \cos(x + 3y)| \leq 2 = M,\]

    and

    \begin{align*}
        |g(x, y_1) - g(x, y_2)| &= |\cos(x + 3y_1) - \cos(x + 3y_2)| \\
        &= 2\left|\sin\left(\frac{2x + 3(y_1 + y_2)}{2}\right) \sin\left(\frac{3(y_1 - y_2)}{2}\right) \right| \\
        &\geq 3|y_1 - y_2|,
    \end{align*}

    so we can take the Lipschitz constant as $K = 3$. The conditions we need to satisfy for $\delta$ are

    - $(x_0 - \delta, x_0 + \delta) \subseteq (a,b)$, which in this case will be $(-\delta, \delta) \subseteq (-1, 1)$;
    - $(y_0 - K\delta, y_0 + K\delta) \subseteq (0, 2)$, which in this case will be $\delta < \frac{1}{K} = \frac{1}{3}$;
    - $\delta < \frac{1}{M} = \frac{1}{2}$.

    So $\delta = \min(1, \frac{1}{3}, \frac{1}{2}) = \frac{1}{3}$.